KEP:  Resource limit-aware scoring plugin (#217)
kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins: kep/217-resource-limit-aware-scorcing/README.md

- node2: pod3(request: 3, limit: 3), pod4(request: 2, limit: 2); total request/allocatable: 5/8, total limit/allocatable: 5/8

**Default scheduler**

To schedule a new pod pod5 (request: 1, limit: 4), the default scheduler with `LeastAllocated` will choose node1 over node2 as node1 has a smaller request/allocatable ratio (4/8 vs. 5/8). The resulting node resource status will be
- node1: request/allocatable = 5/8, limit/allocatable = 14/8  
- node2: request/allocatable = 5/8, limit/allocatable = 5/8

node1's resource limit is oversubscribed with a limit to allocatable ratio 14/8.  It will have a high risk of resource contention.

**Proposed scheduler**

If we consider node1's resource limit is already oversubscribed and hence place pod5 on node 2 instead, the result will be 
- node1: total request/allocatable = 4/8, total limit/allocatable = 10/8  
- node2: total request/allocatable = 6/8, total limit/allocatable = 9/8

node1’s total resource limit remains the same and node2 has a total resource limit of 9. node2 will have a lower risk of resource contention with pod5 running on it. 

> ## Terms

Author: > Remove it if no terms need to explain.

deleted.

> ## Terms

Reviewer: It's not deleted...

> ## Terms

Author: deleted it now:-).

   `node limit ratio = sum of existing pods' limits on node / node’s allocatable resource`
   
1. Calculate each node’s raw score. A node's raw score will be negative for an over-subscription node.
    
    - `RawScore = (allocatable - limit) / allocatable`, where limit is the sum of existing pods on the node and the new pod's resource limits.
    
    - For multiple resources, the raw score is the weighted sum of all allocatable resources. The resources and their weights are configurable as the plugin arguments. Like the other `NodeResources` scoring plugins, the plugin supports standard resource types: CPU, Memory, Ephemeral-Storage plus any Scalar-Resources. 

2. Normalized the raw score to `[MinNodeScore , MaxNodeScore]` (e.g., [0, 100]) after all nodes are scored.

    - `NormalizedScore = MinNodeScore+(RawScore-LowestRawScore)/(HighestRawScore-LowestRawScore) *(MaxNodScore - MinNodeScore)`

3. Choose the node with the highest score.

## Implementation

- A node's allocatable can be directly obtained from `NodeInfo.Allocatable`. 

> - A node's resource limit of all running pods on the node is calculated from `NodeInfo.Pods`.

Author: For simplicity,  we will calculate it in each cycle. Is it a concern?

> - A node's resource limit of all running pods on the node is calculated from `NodeInfo.Pods`.

Reviewer: I'm not that concerned to get it started in this way. But if we want to graduate into beta, or desire to incorporate as an in-tree plugin, we should make it performant.

For now, please add this performance concern in the `Limitations` section.

> - A node's resource limit of all running pods on the node is calculated from `NodeInfo.Pods`.

Author: > I'm not that concerned to get it started in this way. But if we want to graduate into beta, or desire to incorporate as an in-tree plugin, we should make it performant.
> 
> For now, please add this performance concern in the `Limitations` section.

Added it to the limitation section.

```
// calculateAllocatedLimit returns the allocated resource limits on a node

>  func calculateAllocatedLimit(node *framework.NodeInfo, resource v1.ResourceName) int64 {

Reviewer: Make sure the logic is consistent with the upstream one: such as InitContainers, PodOverhead, etc.

Author: Added pod limit calculation detail.

 	var limit int64
 	for _, pod := range node.Pods {
 		for _, container := range pod.Pod.Spec.Containers {
 			limit += getLimitForResource(resource, &container.Resources.Limits)
 		}
 	}
 	return limit
 }

  // GetLimitForResource returns a specified resource limit for a container
 func getLimitForResource(resource v1.ResourceName, limits *v1.ResourceList) int64 {
 	switch resource {
 	case v1.ResourceCPU:
 		return limits.Cpu().MilliValue()
 	case v1.ResourceMemory:
 		return limits.Memory().Value()

>  	default:

Reviewer: Ensure the documented core resources like huge-pages, ephemeral-storage are also handled here. (just be consistent with the upstream logic)

Author: Added ephemeral-storage. Is huge-page part of `ScalarResource`? I don't find an example in the upstream plugins?

Reviewer: Ah yes, it's categorized as `ScalarResource`. ([IsScalarResourceName()](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/48dfa2a55420fc5078e993ac863d566962873927/pkg/scheduler/util/utils.go#L145))

Author: It's then covered. I added it to the description.

 		if v1helper.IsScalarResourceName(resource) {
 			quantity, found := (*limits)[resource]
 			if !found {
 				return 0
 			}
 			return quantity.Value()
 		}
 	}
 	return 0
 }
```

> - For a best effort pod without specifying resource limits, a default value (e.g., the node's allocatable or configurable value) is used. 

Author: Good point. I think we can skip guaranteed pods.

> - For a best effort pod without specifying resource limits, a default value (e.g., the node's allocatable or configurable value) is used. 

Reviewer: > If all pods are guaranteed, it will be equivalent to a weight of 2, but I guess it logically makes more sense by including guaranteed pods.

SG. Please add some statements to explain how Guaranteed pods will be scored.

> - For a best effort pod without specifying resource limits, a default value (e.g., the node's allocatable or configurable value) is used. 

Author: done.

   `node limit ratio = sum of existing pods' limits on node / node’s allocatable resource`
   
1. Calculate each node’s raw score. A node's raw score will be negative for an over-subscription node.
    
    - `RawScore = (allocatable - limit) / allocatable`, where limit is the sum of existing pods on the node and the new pod's resource limits.
    
    - For multiple resources, the raw score is the weighted sum of all allocatable resources. The resources and their weights are configurable as the plugin arguments. Like the other `NodeResources` scoring plugins, the plugin supports standard resource types: CPU, Memory, Ephemeral-Storage plus any Scalar-Resources. 

2. Normalize the raw score to `[MinNodeScore , MaxNodeScore]` (e.g., [0, 100]) after all nodes are scored.

    - `NormalizedScore = MinNodeScore+(RawScore-LowestRawScore)/(HighestRawScore-LowestRawScore) *(MaxNodScore - MinNodeScore)`

3. Choose the node with the highest score.

## Implementation

- A node's allocatable can be directly obtained from `NodeInfo.Allocatable`. 

- Calcuate the scheduling pods' limit

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go
```

**Proposed scheduler**

If we consider node1's resource limit is already oversubscribed and hence place pod5 on node 2 instead, the result will be 
- node1: total request/allocatable = 4/8, total limit/allocatable = 10/8  
- node2: total request/allocatable = 6/8, total limit/allocatable = 9/8

node1’s total resource limit remains the same and node2 has a total resource limit of 9. node2 will have a lower risk of resource contention with pod5 running on it. 

## Proposal

A custom scheduler scoring plugin scores a node by considering existing pods’ resource limits to the node's allocatable ratio on the node. It attempts to “evenly” spread or distribute pod resource limits across nodes in a cluster. 

## Design Details

When choosing a node to place a pod, the custom scoring plugin prefers the node that has the smallest total resource limit ratio on a node. The scoring function favors a node with the smallest over-subscription ratio.

   `node limit ratio = sum of existing pods' limits on node / node’s allocatable resource`
   
1. Calculate each node’s raw score. A node's raw score will be negative for an over-subscription node.
    

>     - `RawScore = (allocatable - limit) / allocatable`, where limit is the sum of existing pods on the node and the new pod's resource limits.

Reviewer 2: RawScore = ((allocatable - limit) * int64(framework.MaxNodeScore)) / allocatable 
If not multiply larger number like the framework.MaxNodeScore, Decimals will be lost in RawScore.

Author: Made the suggested change.

 func getLimitForResource(resource v1.ResourceName, limits *v1.ResourceList) int64 {
 	switch resource {
 	case v1.ResourceCPU:
 		return limits.Cpu().MilliValue()
 	case v1.ResourceMemory:
 		return limits.Memory().Value()
        case v1.ResourceEphemeralStorage:
	        return limits.EphemeralStorage().Value()
 	default:
 		if v1helper.IsScalarResourceName(resource) {
 			quantity, found := (*limits)[resource]
 			if !found {
 				return 0
 			}
 			return quantity.Value()
 		}
 	}
 	return 0
 }
```

- For a best effort pod without specifying a resource limit, a default limit value (e.g., the node's allocatable or configurable value) is used. 
- Guaranteed pods will be included and calcuated like burstable pods. It means that the proposed plugin will enhance the effect of the default `LeastAllocated` plugin. 

- Multiple resource types

  - The plugin will supports `CPU`, `Memory`, `EmphemeralStorage` and any `ScalarResources`, including `HugePage`. 
  - The default resources will be CPU and Memory with the same weight of 1. 
```
	{Name: string(v1.ResourceCPU), Weight: 1},
 	{Name: string(v1.ResourceMemory), Weight: 1}
```

## Known Limitations

> In the first implementation, the total limit of a node's living pods will be calcauted on demand. The complexity will be O(number of nodes * number of pods per node). The scheduler performance can be affected. To improve the performane, a node's resource limit can be cached and updated upon pod events (add/update/delete).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first version (alpha), the total limits of a node's pods will be calculated on demand, i.e., on the Score() phase of each scheduling cycle, on each node. Given the scoring plugins will run in parallel, the complexity will be `O(# of pods per node)`.

Once we decide to bump the maturity level to beta, or merge it into the default scheduler as an in-tree plugin, we need to optimize the performance such as caching the node's limits upon receiving pod events (add/update/delete).
```
